.Dd May 14, 2015
.Dt INIT 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm init
.Nd initialize system
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Cm single | Cm emergency | Cm 0 | Cm 1 | Cm 3 | Cm 6
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a somewhat System V-compatible init process implementation.
.Pp
.Nm
is the first program to run in user mode by the kernel.
It is responsible for initializing and bringing up the system.
When invoked as the first process,
.Nm
reads
.Pa /etc/inittab
for information on how to bring the system up.
.Ss Runlevels
A
.Ic runlevel
is a software configuration which represents the current state of the system, and the associated exclusive sets of processes
.Nm
manages.
The runlevel is determined at
.Nm
start, but can be changed during runtime.
This implementation supports the following runlevels:
.Pp
.Bl -column
.It Ic 0 Ta The system is shutting down.
.It Ic 1 Ta The system is in single-user mode.
.It Ic 3 Ta The system is in multi-user mode.
.It Ic 6 Ta The system is rebooting.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
first checks the kernel command line for a numeric argument.
If one is found and it matches a supported runlevel, it is used as the runlevel to start in.
If either
.Cm single
or
.Cm emergency
are found on the kernel command line, runlevel
.Ic 1
is used.
If no runlevel is found,
.Nm
checks
.Pa /etc/inittab
for an
.Ic initdefault
entry.
If no such entry is found,
.Nm
defaults to runlevel 3.
.Ss Initialization
Having determined the runlevel to start in,
.Nm
first executes the
.Ic sysinit
entries in
.Pa /etc/inittab ,
followed by the
.Ic boot
and
.Ic bootwait
entries in order of appearance.
It then executes the
.Ic once ,
.Ic wait
and
.Ic respawn
entries corresponding to the chosen runlevel.
It will automatically respawn entries marked as
.Ic respawn :
refer to
.Xr inittab 5
for details.
.Ss Changing runlevels
The current runlevel can be changed at any time, provided the system is not in either runlevel
.Ic 0
or
.Ic 6 .
This is done by
.Cm halt :
refer to
.Xr halt 8
for details.
Changing a runlevel makes
.Nm
terminate all the processes belonging to the current runlevel that are not in the new runlevel.
.Nm
then executes the remaining
.Ic once ,
.Ic wait
and
.Ic respawn
entries for the new runlevel.
When switching to runlevel
.Ic 0 ,
.Nm
will shutdown the system after having executed all entries.
Similarly, when switching to runlevel
.Ic 6 ,
.Nm
will reboot the system after having executed all entries.
.Ss Shutting down
The system can be shut down by simply switching to runlevel
.Ic 0 .
Similarly, the system can be rebooted by simply switching to runlevel
.Ic 6 .
This implementation does not support halting the system.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Nm
executes its children with the following environment variables set:
.Pp
.Bl -column "CONSOLE"
.It Ev CONSOLE Ta If not given by the kernel,
.Pa /dev/console .
.It Ev HOME Ta Pa /
.It Ev PATH Ta Pa /usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin
.It Ev PWD Ta Pa /
.It Ev TERM Ta linux
.It Ev USER Ta root
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Shiz Aq Mt hi@shiz.me
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr inittab 5 ,
.Xr halt 8 ,
.Xr shutdown 8 ,
.Xr killall5 8
